The CLIP Model is Secretly an Image-to-Prompt
Converter
Yuxuan Ding∗
School of Electronic Engineering
Xidian University
Xi’an 710071, China
yxding@stu.xidian.edu.cnChunna Tian†
School of Electronic Engineering
Xidian University
Xi’an 710071, China
chnatian@xidian.edu.cn
Haoxuan Ding
Unmanned System Research Institute
Northwestern Polytechnical University
Xi’an 710072, China
haoxuan.ding@mail.nwpu.edu.cnLingqiao Liu†
Australian Institute for Machine Learning
The University of Adelaide
Adelaide 5005, Australia
lingqiao.liu@adelaide.edu.au
Abstract
The Stable Diffusion model is a prominent text-to-image generation model that re-
lies on a text prompt as its input, which is encoded using the Contrastive Language-
Image Pre-Training (CLIP). However, text prompts have limitations when it comes
to incorporating implicit information from reference images. Existing methods
have attempted to address this limitation by employing expensive training pro-
cedures involving millions of training samples for image-to-image generation.
In contrast, this paper demonstrates that the CLIP model, as utilized in Stable
Diffusion, inherently possesses the ability to instantaneously convert images into
text prompts. Such an image-to-prompt conversion can be achieved by utilizing a
linear projection matrix that is calculated in a closed form. Moreover, the paper
showcases that this capability can be further enhanced by either utilizing a small
amount of similar-domain training data (approximately 100 images) or incorpo-
rating several online training steps (around 30 iterations) on the reference images.
By leveraging these approaches, the proposed method offers a simple and flexible
solution to bridge the gap between images and text prompts. This methodology can
be applied to various tasks such as image variation and image editing, facilitating
more effective and seamless interaction between images and textual prompts.
1 Introduction
In recent years, there has been a surge of interest in vision-and-language research, particularly in the
field of text-to-image generation. Prominent models in this domain include autoregression models
like DALL-E [ 1] and Make-A-Scene [ 2], as well as diffusion models like DALL-E 2 [ 3] and Stable
Diffusion [ 4]. These models have revolutionized the quality of generated images. They leverage
text prompts to synthesize images depicting various objects and scenes that align with the given
text. Among these models, Stable Diffusion [ 4] stands out as a significant open-source model. It
serves as a foundation for many recent works, including image generation [ 5,6,7,8], image editing
[9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14], and more.
∗This work was done while Yuxuan Ding was visiting The University of Adelaide as a visiting researcher.
†Corresponding author.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).arXiv:2305.12716v2  [cs.CV]  15 Feb 2024
Figure 1: Demonstration of image vari-
ation. The image on the left is a real
reference image, while the four on the
right are generated from our method.
Figure 2: Attention map of Stable Diffusion [ 4]. The
bottom row sets attention weights of caption words to
zero, only keeping the start-/end-token, so the caption
maps of the bottom are black. Also notice the start-
token has strong weights so the map is all white.
However, text prompts have limitations when it comes to incorporating unspeakable information
from reference images. It becomes challenging to generate a perfect and detailed prompt when users
want to synthesize images related to a picture they have seen. Image variation techniques aim to
address this limitation by enabling users to generate multiple variations of an input image, without
relying on complex prompts. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the generated variations closely resemble the
reference image, often sharing the same scene or objects but with distinct details.
Stable Diffusion Reimagine (SD-R) [ 4]3is a recently proposed image variation algorithm. It achieves
this goal by retraining Stable Diffusion [ 4], where the text encoder is replaced with an image encoder
to adapt the model for image input. The model is trained using millions of images and over 200,000
GPU-hours, enabling it to effectively generate image variations based on reference images.
In this paper, we make a significant discovery that allows a more cost-effective image-to-prompt
conversion approach. We find the CLIP model [ 15], as utilized in Stable Diffusion, can be repurposed
as an effective image-to-prompt converter. This converter can be directly employed or served as a
valuable initialization for a data-efficient fine-tuning process. As a result, the expenses associated
with constructing or customizing an image-to-prompt converter can be substantially reduced.
More specifically, our method is built upon a surprising discovery: the control of image generation
through text is primarily influenced by the embedding of the end-of-sentence (EOS) token. We
found that masking all word tokens, except for the start and end tokens, does not adversely affect
the quality of image generation, as illustrated in Figure 2. Simultaneously, during CLIP training, the
projection of the end-token embedding is trained to align with the visual embedding. This inherent
relationship enables us to derive a closed-form projection matrix that converts visual embedding
into an embedding that is capable of controlling the generation of Stable Diffusion [ 4]. We call this
method Stable Diffusion Image-to-Prompt Conversion (SD-IPC).
In addition, we introduce two methods to enhance the quality and flexibility of image-to-prompt
conversion. The first approach involves parameter-efficient tuning using a small amount of data,
consisting of only 100 images and requiring just 1 GPU-hour. This method encourages the model
to better preserve image information and enables practitioners to control the specific content they
want to retain when generating new images. The second approach involves customizing the model
on reference images using a few iterations, ensuring that the generated images are closer to specific
concepts. While this approach has been explored in previous research, we demonstrate that with the
advantageous initialization provided by SD-IPC, the online fine-tuning requires significantly fewer
iterations to achieve desirable results.
2 Background and Related Works
2.1 Diffusion Model
Firstly, we present a brief overview of the Stable Diffusion [ 4], which serves as our underlying model.
Diffusion models (DMs) [ 16,17,18,19] belong to a class of latent variable models. In DMs, there
exist two Markov chains known as the diffusion process and the reverse process , both having a fixed
3https://stability.ai/blog/stable-diffusion-reimagine
2
length T. The diffusion process progressively introduces Gaussian noise to the original data ( x0)
until the signal becomes corrupted ( xT). During DMs training, the reverse process is learned, which
operates in the opposite direction of the diffusion process. The reverse process can be viewed as a
denoising procedure, moving from xttoxt−1at each step. After multiple denoising steps, the model
obtains instances that closely resemble the real data.
Stable Diffusion [ 4] is built on the Latent Diffusion Model (LDM) [ 4]. LDM [ 4] proposed to do
diffusion process in a latent space rather than the usual pixel space, significantly reducing the training
and inference cost of the diffusion model. The authors proposed to utilize a V AE compression to
get the latent code z0, which is x0above. Diffusion process will build on the latents. A U-Net
architecture [ 17] with timestep and text conditions would do the reverse. The text prompt is injected
into the model with cross-attention layers. We denote ϵθ(zt, ctxt(ptxt), t)as the output of the U-Net,
which is the predicted denoising result. ptxtis the textual prompt and ctxt(ptxt)is the prompt
embedding from the text encoder. tis the timestep. The training objective of DMs is as followed:
Eϵ,z,ptxt,th
∥ϵ−ϵθ(zt, ctxt(ptxt), t)∥2
2i
, (1)
where ϵ∼ N (0,I)is the noise used to corrupt clean latent variables. During the generation, the latent
zt, which starts at a random Gaussian noise zT, will recursively go through a denoising operation
untilz0is sampled. Finally, z0is reconstructed to an image by the V AE.
2.2 CLIP Model
The CLIP model [ 15] has garnered significant acclaim as a groundbreaking zero-shot model in recent
years. Its training process demands optimizing a contrastive loss function using extensive 400-million
pairs of images and corresponding text descriptions. Through the meticulous training, the model has
been able to achieve unparalleled capabilities in zero-shot classification and image-text retrieval.
The model comprises an image encoder CLIP i(·), a text encoder CLIP t(·), a visual projection layer
Wi, and a textual projection layer Wt. The image encoder encodes an input image xinto a visual
embedding fimgderived from a special class-token. By applying the visual projection layer, the
embedding is projected into the CLIP visual embedding fc
img. Similarly, the text encoder processes
the input text, yielding a sequence of output embeddings ftxtfor each text token and a start token and
end-of-sentence (EOS) )token. The embedding of the EOS token ft,⟨eos⟩
txt , where tdenotes the length
of the sentence, is projected into the CLIP textual embedding fc
txtthrough Wt. Formally,
fimg= CLIP i(x),fc
img=Wi·fimg, (2)
ftxt=CLIP t(s),fc
txt=Wt·ft,⟨eos⟩
txt . (3)
The training objective of CLIP is to maximize the cosine similarity between fc
txtandfc
imgfor matched
sentence-image pair while minimizing this similarity for unmatched pairs. For the simplicity of
discussion, we denote the space spanned by ftxtasT-space and the space spanned by fc
∗asC-space.
The CLIP text encoder [ 15] is directly used in Stable Diffusion to encode text prompts. It encodes a
text prompt as a sequence of embeddings:
ftxt:=h
f0,⟨sos⟩
txt ,f1,w0
txt, ...,ft,⟨eos⟩
txt , ...,f76,⟨eos⟩
txti
(4)
where f0,⟨sos⟩
txt ,fi,w
txtandft,⟨eos⟩
txt denote the embeddings corresponding to the start-token, the i-th
word token and end-token, respectively. From ft+1,⟨eos⟩
txt tof76,⟨eos⟩
txt are padded tokens.
2.3 Image Variation & Customized Generation
Image Variation. Image variation aims to generate images similar to the reference image but not
identical. SD-R [ 4] is proposed to address this problem, which builds upon the Stable-unCLIP model4.
The authors fine-tuned the Stable Diffusion model [ 4] to align with the CLIP visual embedding. In
SD-R [ 4], images can be directly input into the diffusion model through CLIP image encoder. Since
the original Stable Diffusion is conditioned on text only, an expensive fine-tuning is required to
4https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-diffusion-2-1-unclip
3
accommodate this new input. The process took 200,000 GPU-hours on NVIDIA A100-40GB GPU
while our approach only requires 1 GPU-hour on NVIDIA A5000-24GB GPU5.
Customized Generation. Recent works such as DreamBooth [ 11], Textual Inversion [ 14], and
Custom Diffusion [ 13] focus on learning a special text prompt to feature specific objects or persons
from the reference images. For instance, given several photos of a particular cat, these methods use a
special-token " ⟨s⟩cat" to represent the concept and incorporate it with the text prompt. DreamBooth
[11] and Custom Diffusion [ 13] also perform simultaneous fine-tuning of diffusion model parameters.
However, the fine-tuning process is still somewhat time-consuming, with Custom Diffusion [ 13]
requiring nearly 6 minutes on 2 NVIDIA A100 GPUs. In contrast, our fast update SD-IPC only needs
1 minute on 2 A5000 GPUs.
Image Editing. Stable Diffusion [ 4] is commonly used for image editing tasks. Prompt-to-Prompt
[9] and Plug-and-Play [ 10] utilize attention map as a bridge to enable concept and style manipulation.
Null-Text Inversion [ 20] and Pix2Pix-Zero [ 21] relies on inversion-based methods. InstructPix2Pix
[22] creates a dataset of paired edited images and fine-tunes Stable Diffusion [ 4] as an editing model.
It’s important to highlight that while our primary focus in developing this method was to enhance
image variation, it can also be employed to generate images based on prompts that combine both
textual instructions and accompanying images. Notably, unlike existing approaches that frequently
reproduce the layout of the original image in the generated output, our method operates without being
confined to replicating the exact layout of the source image.
3 Methodology
3.1 Image-to-Prompt Conversion via Projecting CLIP embedding
By design, the image generation process in the stable diffusion model should be influenced by
embeddings of all tokens in a prompt, like Eq. (4). Interestingly, we have discovered that masking
word tokens, by setting their attention weights to 0 except for the start-/end-token, does not have a
negative impact on the quality of generated images. This finding is visually illustrated in Figure 2.
On another note, the training objective of CLIP [ 15] is to match the embeddings fc
imgandfc
txt,
withfc
txtbeing essentially a projection of ft,⟨eos⟩
txt . This inherent relationship, coupled with the
aforementioned observation, leads us to establish a connection between fc
imgandft,⟨eos⟩
txt , effectively
converting the visual embedding to a prompt embedding.
Formally, we assume that after training, CLIP model can induce high cosine similarity between the
fc
imgandftxtand we can further make the following approximation:
fc
img
∥fc
img∥≈fc
txt
∥fc
txt∥,with fc
txt=Wtft,⟨eos⟩
txt . (5)
By using Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse [23] on Wt6, we obtain an estimate of ft,⟨eos⟩
txt fromfc
img:
ft,⟨eos⟩
txt ≈∥fc
txt∥
∥fc
img∥W+
tfc
img:=fcnvrt
txt,where , W+
t= 
W⊤
tWt−1W⊤
t, (6)
where we empirically observe ∥fc
txt∥can be well approximated by a constant, e.g., ∥fc
txt∥= 27 and
Wtcan be obtained from the pretrained CLIP model [ 15]. We denote the converted embedding as
fcnvrt
txt and use it to assemble a pseudo-prompt sequence with the following format:
˜ftxt:=h
f0,⟨sos⟩
txt ,f1,cnvrt
txt , ...,f76,cnvrt
txti
, (7)
where f1,cnvrt
txt =···=f76,cnvrt
txt =fcnvrt
txt . In other words, we replace all word-tokens, pad-tokens
and end-token in Eq. (4) with the converted fcnvrt
txt , based on the fact that fcnvrt
txt is an approximation
offt,⟨eos⟩
txt and masking word-tokens does not influence the generation7.
5FP16 computing performance of A100 is 77.97 TFLOPS vurse 27.77 TFLOPS of A5000.
6We use singular value decomposition (SVD) to form the pseudo-inverse, singular values which are smaller
than 0.3 will be treated as 0.
7Here we keep the pad-tokens, so the index of token is from 0 to 76, where the maximum length of CLIP text
input is 77, even they are the same fcnvrt
txt , they would contribute to the attention weights in cross-attention, to
decrease the weights of start-token.
4
Input Images SD-R SD-IPC (Ours) SD w/ Text
Figure 3: Image variation results on MSCOCO [ 24]. SD w/ Text [ 4] is generation from the ground-
truth text prompts that are not available for variation methods such as SD-R and SD-IPC. SD-IPC is
our method, notice that SD-IPC does not need any training compared to SD-R [4].
This approximation allows immediate conversion of an image to a text prompt by directly mapping it
to an (approximately) equivalent prompt. We refer to this method as Stable Diffusion Image-to-
Prompt Conversion (SD-IPC). Experimental results in Fig. 3 demonstrate that SD-IPC effectively
captures the semantic information present in the reference image and enables image variation.
Furthermore, we have identified a simple yet effective approach to combine both the text prompt and
the converted image prompt within our framework. To achieve this, we perform a weighted average
of the two embeddings. Formally, the process can be described as follows:
fcomb
txt =fcnvrt
txt +α·ft,⟨eos⟩
txt ,˜fedit
txt=h
f0,⟨sos⟩
txt ,f1,w0
txt, ...,ft,comb
txt , ...,f76,comb
txti
, (8)
where fi,comb
text =fcomb
text is the combined-token embedding and αis a hyperparameter to control the
expression of editing text. Notice that the editing word-token fi,w
txtare also in the embedding sequence.
Conditioning on ˜fedit
textcould generate images that match both the visual and textual conditions. We
report some editing results in Appendix D.2.
3.2 Fine-tuning with Image-to-Prompt Conversion
While the aforementioned SD-IPC method demonstrates reasonable performance, it still faces
challenges when it comes to real-world applications due to two main reasons. Firstly, the conversion
process in SD-IPC relies on approximations, which may not always yield optimal results. Secondly,
determining the exact topic or theme of an image introduces ambiguity. As the saying goes, "an
image is worth a thousand words", but precisely which words? The same reference image can be
interpreted differently based on its objects, scenes, styles, or the identities of people depicted within.
Therefore, it becomes crucial to have a method that allows control of the content we wish to preserve
and convert into the prompt. To address these concerns and cater to the needs, we propose a partial
fine-tuning approach for the CLIP converter derived from Sec. 3.1.
In proposed approach, we focus on fine-tuning two specific types of parameters. Firstly, we address the
optimization of the projection matrix within the cross-attention layer of the U-Net in Stable Diffusion
[4]. This aspect aligns with the methodology employed in Custom Diffusion [ 13]. Furthermore, we
incorporate deep prompt tuning [ 25] into the transformer of the CLIP image encoder. Deep prompt
tuning [ 25] introduces learnable tokens within all layers of the transformer while keeping the weights
of other components fixed. More details can be found in Appendix A.
5
Input Images SD-RSD-IPC-FT 
(Ours)SD-IPC (Ours)
ImageNet Finetuned CelebA-HQ Finetuned Places365 Finetuned
Figure 4: Fine-tuned SD-IPC, denoted as SD-IPC-FT, can enhance the image-to-prompt conversion
quality.
The parameters can be learned by using the following loss:
Eϵ,z,xref,th
∥ϵ−ϵθ(zt, cimg(xref), t)∥2i
+Eϵ,z,ptxt,th
∥ϵ−ϵθ(zt, ctxt(ptxt), t)∥2i
, (9)
here the first term is Lcnvrt , which is fine-tuning with the image-to-prompt input, and the second
term is Ltext, which is the original text-to-image training loss, we utilize this as a regularization to
keep the text-to-image generation. In the proposed approach, cimg(·)refers to the image-to-prompt
conversion derived from SD-IPC. It encompasses the CLIP image transformer augmented with the
newly-introduced learnable prompts in deep prompting and the fixed inverse matrix derived from
Eq. (6). During tuning, the inverse projection matrix remains unchanged. ztrepresents the latent
representation of the target image xtarget at time step t. The objective function aims to encourage the
image-to-prompt conversion to extract information from xrefthat facilitates the recovery of xtarget.
There are two possible choices for xtarget: (1)xtargetcan be selected to be the same as xref. (2)xtargetand
xrefcan be different images, but with a shared visual concept that we intend to extract as the prompt.
This usually poses stronger supervision to encourage the converter to extract information related to
the shared theme. The schematic representation of this scheme is illustrated in Appendix C.2.
We use images randomly sampled from ImageNet [ 26], CelebA-HQ [ 27], and Places365 [ 28] dataset
to encourage the model extract object, identity, and scene information, respectively. Experiments
show that merely 100 images and 1 GPU-hour of training are sufficient for achieving satisfied results
thanks to the good initialization provided by SD-IPC. We call this approach SD-IPC-FT , the results
are shown in Fig. 4. Some editing examples are listed in Fig. 5, Fig. 6, and Appendix D.4.
3.3 Fast Update for Customized Generation
Existing methods, such as DreamBooth [ 11] and Custom Diffusion [ 13], suggest that partially fine-
tuning the model on given concept images before generation can be an effective way to synthesized
images with customized visual concepts, e.g., people with the same identity. Our approach can also
benefit from this scheme by performing such an online update with SD-IPC. This can be achieved by
simply replacing the training images in SD-IPC-FT with reference images and use Lconvrt only. We
call this method SD-IPC-CT (CT stands for customized concept tuning). Interestingly, we find that
our method can generate customized images with much fewer updates. As a comparison, SD-IPC-CT
only takes 30-iteration updates with around 1 minute on 2 A5000 GPUs while the Custom Diffusion
[13] needs 250 iterations (6 minutes on 2 A100 GPUs). We report customized generation in Fig. 7.
6
Input Images
“On the beach ” “Under the starry sky ”SD-R
Without EditingSD-RSD-IPC-FT 
(Ours)SD-RSD-IPC-FT 
(Ours)SD-IPC-FT 
(Ours)
Figure 5: Image editing result with SD-IPC-FT trained with 100 images sampled from ImageNet
[26]. SD-IPC-FT shows better editing performance than that of SD-R [4].
Input Images
“Wearing glasses ” “Wearing a hat ”
SD-R
Without EditingSD-RSD-IPC-FT 
(Ours)
SD-RSD-IPC-FT 
(Ours)
SD-IPC-FT 
(Ours)
Figure 6: Image editing result with SD-IPC-FT trained with 100 images sampled from CelebA-HQ
[27]. SD-IPC-FT shows better editing performance than that of SD-R [4].
4 Experiments
4.1 Training Details
Datasets & Evaluations. In previous discussion, we propose three different fine-tuning schemes,
using ImageNet [ 26] for object understanding, CelebA-HQ [ 27] for portrait understanding, and
Places365 [ 28] for scene understanding. The specific training classes or identities we have selected
for each dataset can be found in Appendix B. Each dataset includes 100 images, the test images
are non-overlap with the training classes. In order to enable customized generation, we choose two
objects and two identities as examples, each accompanied by five images. To assess the quality and
semantic consistency of our generated outputs, we measure FID-Score [29] and CLIP-Score [30].
Architecture & Hyperparameter. We utilize Stable Diffusion v1.48and CLIP ViT-L/149models
in this paper. We compare our method with the larger Stable-unCLIP-small model10using CLIP
ViT-H/14 and a 1,024-dimensional attention feature. Our method uses DDIM [ 19] for sampling, while
8https://huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4
9https://huggingface.co/openai/clip-vit-large-patch14
10https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-diffusion-2-1-unclip-small
7
SD-IPC-FT 
(Ours)Custom 
DiffusionSD-IPC-FT 
(Ours)Custom 
DiffusionSD-IPC-FT 
(Ours)Custom 
Diffusion
Without Editing
Without Editing“Rainbow color hair” “Young bog/girl”
“On the bed” “Pink furry”Training 
Images
Figure 7: Customized generation examples. The images at left are training images, they are all from
one concept or one identity. We compared our SD-IPC-CT with Custom Diffusion [ 13], notice that
both results are trained by 5 reference images with merely 30 iterations.
SD-IPC-CT
(Ours)
DreamBooth
Custom
Diffusion
Textual
InversionA [V] cat  in 
the snow.A [V] cat  on a 
cobblestone 
street.A [V] cat  
floating on top 
of water.A [V] cat with 
a blue house in 
the background.A purple [V] 
cat.A [V] cat  with 
a wheat field in 
the background.
Figure 8: Results of DreamBooth [11] benchmark, the training images are listed at top-left corner.
Stable-unCLIP uses PNDM [ 31], both with 50 sampling steps. SD-IPC-FT is trained for 100, 50, and
100 epochs on ImageNet [ 26], CelebA-HQ [ 27], and Places365 [ 28], respectively. The learning rates
for all datasets are 1 e-5 with cosine decay. Customized generation has a constant learning rate of
5e-6 for 30-iteration updates. Training is conducted on 2 A5000 GPUs. The editing αis set to 0.9.
4.2 Image Variation Results
SD-IPC. We evaluate image variation on MSCOCO [ 24] using all 5,000 images in the 2017-split
validation set. Fig. 3 compares text-based generation, SD-R [ 4], and our SD-IPC. Both SD-R [ 4]
8
Table 1: Accuracy and Retrieval recalls (%) of original
CLIP [ 15] (C-space) and the inverse matrix transfer ( T-
space). Acc@ kis the top- kaccuracy of ImageNet [ 26]
val-set, TR@ kand IR@ kare top- ktext and image retrieval
recalls. This is a surprising result that there is almost no
performance decline.
Emb. Space Acc@1 Acc@5 TR@1 TR@5 IR@1 IR@5
C-space 71.41 91.78 74.58 92.98 55.54 82.39
T-space 69.48 90.62 71.62 92.06 54.82 82.20Table 2: FID-Score [ 29] and CLIP-
Score [ 30] (%) of the generation
results. SD w/ Text [ 4] means the
generation from ground-truth text.
Methods FID CLIP-Score
SD w/ Text [4] 23.65 70.15
SD-R [4] 19.86 82.59
SD-IPC (Ours) 24.78 73.57
and our method demonstrate image variation, but our approach utilizes an inverse matrix without
training. The FID-Score [ 29] and CLIP-Score [ 30] are reported in Tab. 2. Our SD-IPC maintains
image quality similar to text-based generation (FID-Score: 24.78 vs. 23.65, CLIP-Score: 73.57 vs.
70.15). Note that SD-R [4] achieves better results due to its advanced backbone model.
Finetuning. In Fig. 4, it is observed that SD-IPC may exhibit inconsistency, for example, the input
"teddybear" generates a picture of "kid". This inconsistency could be attributed to fact that SD-IPC
fails to discern the semantically related concepts "kid" and "teddybear". However, this issue can be
rectified through fine-tuning, as demonstrated in Fig. 4, SD-IPC-FT achieves improved generation
quality. Moreover, we find that the editing capability of SD-IPC-FT, as illustrated in Fig. 5, Fig. 6, and
Appendix D.4, surpasses that of SD-R [ 4], and fine-tuning does not impact the editing performance.
We incorporated a quantitative experiment to validate the superior editing performance of SD-IPC-FT
in comparison to SD-R [ 4]. We utilize images from DreamBooth [ 11] benchmark and randomly
select an editing text for each test image. Editing performance is evaluated using CLIP-T score, the
quantitative results are presented in Tab. 4. As seen, our method achieves a higher CLIP-T score
than SD-R [ 4]. Furthermore, we include the training-free SD-IPC for comparison, revealing even
SD-IPC slightly outperforms SD-R [ 4]. The role of different target images used in the fine-tuning
stage is outlined in Appendix C.2, which showcases how the choice of target images influences the
generation result. Additional generation results are presented in Appendix D.
4.3 Customized Generation Results
In Fig. 7, we compare our SD-IPC-CT with Custom Diffusion [ 13] in terms of customized generation.
We evaluate customization for two identities ("Obama" and "Chastain") and two objects ("cat" and
"tortoise"). The training process only requires 5 images and 30 iterations. The results in Fig. 7 reveal
that Custom Diffusion [ 13] struggles to learn the details of the concept with such limited updates,
while our SD-IPC-CT demonstrates impressive performance, particularly in the "young boy/girl"
editing. However, for rare instances like the "tortoise" example, both methods do not perform well.
For quantitative results, we followed DreamBooth [ 11]. We used DINO and CLIP-I for subject fidelity
and CLIP-T for editing performance. Comparing with DreamBooth [ 11], Textual Inversion [ 14], and
Custom Diffusion [ 13], the results are in Tab. 3, Fig. 8, and Appendix D.5. DreamBooth [ 11] excels
in DINO/CLIP-I scores but lags in CLIP-T, indicating limited editing performance, evident in visually
similar outputs to training images. Textual Inversion [ 14] and Custom Diffusion [ 13] have strong
CLIP-T but weak DINO/CLIP-I scores, indicating challenges in preserving subject details. Our
SD-IPC-CT method strikes a balance between subject identity preservation and editing performance.
Table 3: Results of DreamBooth [ 11] benchmark and the comparison
with common methods.
Method DNIO CLIP-I CLIP-T Comments
DreamBooth [11] 60.11 77.78 25.81 Good Identity , Weak Editing
Textual Inversion [14] 25.11 62.44 29.53 Weak Identity, Good Editing
Custom Diffusion [13] 39.67 68.37 30.90 Weak Identity, Good Editing
SD-IPC-CT (Ours) 50.25 74.59 28.14 Good Identity ,Good EditingTable 4: Superior
editing performance
of SD-IPC-FT.
Method CLIP-T
SD-IPC 26.84
SD-IPC-FT 28.69
SD-R [4] 26.01
4.4 Ablation Study
Effectiveness of Inverse Projection Matrix. To evaluate the effectiveness of the inverse projection
matrix in SD-IPC, we introduce a fully-connected layer instead of the inverse matrix in the image-to-
prompt conversion, referred to as SD-IPC-FC and SD-IPC-FC(I), where (I) means to initialize with
9
Input
ImagesSD-IPCSD-IPC
-FT (C)SD-IPC
-FT (U)SD-IPC-FC SD-IPC-FTSD-IPC
-FC (I)
Figure 9: Image variation results of different fine-tuning
settings. SD-IPC-FT (C) means only training CLIP prompts,
SD-IPC-FT (U) means only training U-Net cross-attention
layers, SD-IPC-FC (I) means initializing the FC-layer with
the inverse matrix.
SD-IPC-FCSD-IPC-FT 
(Ours)Input Images
Figure 10: Effectiveness of using
Eq. 6 for SD-IPC-FT.
our inverse projection matrix. We train the FC models with the same training data as SD-IPC-FT.
However, the results in Fig. 10 indicate SD-IPC-FC suffers from overfitting. SD-IPC-FC(I) slightly
alleviates the overfitting but still gets inferior results, shown in Fig. 9. This highlights that our
SD-IPC-FT benefits from the good initialization of SD-IPC and preserves knowledge in CLIP [15].
Prompt Learning & U-Net Fine-tuning. We perform quantitative tests on (text-edited) image
variation for the comprehensive ablation studies following the testing in Sec. 4.2. For text-edited
variation, we use the editing text as the prompt, such as "A [Class Name] with a mountain in the
background.". We present the results of individual fine-tuning for two components: SD-IPC-FT
(C) for CLIP and SD-IPC-FT (U) for the U-Net. Qualitative results are available in Fig. 9, while
quantitative results are provided in Tab. 5 and Tab. 6. It demonstrates that fine-tuning each component
contributes to model adaptation, with the best performance achieved when simultaneously fine-tuning
both two parts. Some editing comparisons are in Appendix C.3.
Additionally, we investigate the influence of the editing parameter αin Appendix C.1.
Table 5: Results of image variation with dif-
ferent fine-tuning settings.
Method DNIO CLIP-I CLIP-T
SD-IPC 44.60 77.44 25.47
SD-IPC-FT (C) 49.11 76.51 25.82
SD-IPC-FT (U) 48.53 79.06 26.17
SD-IPC-FT 52.03 79.59 25.90Table 6: Results of text-edited image variation
with different fine-tuning settings.
Method DNIO CLIP-I CLIP-T
SD-IPC 31.09 68.66 26.84
SD-IPC-FT (C) 29.10 67.03 27.99
SD-IPC-FT (U) 35.21 69.99 28.56
SD-IPC-FT 40.28 71.97 28.69
4.5 Limitations & Feature Directions
While SD-IPC offers an alternative to SD-R [ 4], there are remaining challenges. Firstly, the editing
text must be contextually appropriate, as using "on the beach" to edit a portrait may result in a person
being on the beach but lacking facial features. Secondly, SD-IPC currently does not support multiple
image inputs. Another future study is to extend our method to generate a sequence of images with
consistency. Appendix E shows some potential of our method in this direction.
5 Conclusion
This paper reveals that the CLIP model [ 15] serves as an image-to-prompt converter, enabling image
variation in text-to-image Stable Diffusion [ 4] without extensive training. This finding enhances
our understanding of the CLIP embedding space, demonstrating that a simple inverse matrix can
convert visual embeddings into textual prompts. Leveraging this image-to-prompt conversion, our
SD-IPC methods achieve impressive image variation and editing capabilities, while also enabling fast
adaptation for customized generation. Experimental results also show the potential of our method
in more multi-modal tasks. We anticipate that this study will inspire future research exploring the
image-to-prompt pathway in CLIP-based or LDM-based models.
10
6 Acknowledgement
This work was partly supported by the China Scholarship Council under Grant 202006960047
and partly by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.62173265). Lingqiao Liu is
supported by Centre of Augmented Reasoning.
References
[1]Ramesh, A., M. Pavlov, G. Goh, et al. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International
Conference on Machine Learning , pages 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.
[2]Gafni, O., A. Polyak, O. Ashual, et al. Make-a-scene: Scene-based text-to-image generation
with human priors. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2022: 17th European Conference, Tel Aviv,
Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XV , pages 89–106. Springer, 2022.
[3]Ramesh, A., P. Dhariwal, A. Nichol, et al. Hierarchical text-conditional image generation with
clip latents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125 , 2022.
[4]Rombach, R., A. Blattmann, D. Lorenz, et al. High-resolution image synthesis with latent
diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , pages 10684–10695. 2022.
[5]Feng, W., X. He, T.-J. Fu, et al. Training-free structured diffusion guidance for compositional
text-to-image synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.05032 , 2022.
[6]Liu, N., S. Li, Y . Du, et al. Compositional visual generation with composable diffusion models.
InComputer Vision–ECCV 2022: 17th European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27,
2022, Proceedings, Part XVII , pages 423–439. Springer, 2022.
[7]Chefer, H., Y . Alaluf, Y . Vinker, et al. Attend-and-excite: Attention-based semantic guidance
for text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13826 , 2023.
[8] Zhang, L., M. Agrawala. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2302.05543 , 2023.
[9]Hertz, A., R. Mokady, J. Tenenbaum, et al. Prompt-to-prompt image editing with cross attention
control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01626 , 2022.
[10] Tumanyan, N., M. Geyer, S. Bagon, et al. Plug-and-play diffusion features for text-driven
image-to-image translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12572 , 2022.
[11] Ruiz, N., Y . Li, V . Jampani, et al. Dreambooth: Fine tuning text-to-image diffusion models for
subject-driven generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.12242 , 2022.
[12] Kawar, B., S. Zada, O. Lang, et al. Imagic: Text-based real image editing with diffusion models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.09276 , 2022.
[13] Kumari, N., B. Zhang, R. Zhang, et al. Multi-concept customization of text-to-image diffusion.
InCVPR . 2023.
[14] Gal, R., Y . Alaluf, Y . Atzmon, et al. An image is worth one word: Personalizing text-to-image
generation using textual inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.01618 , 2022.
[15] Radford, A., J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural
language supervision. In International conference on machine learning , pages 8748–8763.
PMLR, 2021.
[16] Sohl-Dickstein, J., E. Weiss, N. Maheswaranathan, et al. Deep unsupervised learning using
nonequilibrium thermodynamics. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages
2256–2265. PMLR, 2015.
[17] Ho, J., A. Jain, P. Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , 33:6840–6851, 2020.
[18] Dhariwal, P., A. Nichol. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems , 34:8780–8794, 2021.
[19] Song, J., C. Meng, S. Ermon. Denoising diffusion implicit models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.02502 , 2020.
11
[20] Mokady, R., A. Hertz, K. Aberman, et al. Null-text inversion for editing real images using
guided diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition , pages 6038–6047. 2023.
[21] Parmar, G., K. Kumar Singh, R. Zhang, et al. Zero-shot image-to-image translation. In ACM
SIGGRAPH 2023 Conference Proceedings , pages 1–11. 2023.
[22] Brooks, T., A. Holynski, A. A. Efros. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image editing
instructions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition , pages 18392–18402. 2023.
[23] Penrose, R. A generalized inverse for matrices. In Mathematical proceedings of the Cambridge
philosophical society , vol. 51, pages 406–413. Cambridge University Press, 1955.
[24] Lin, T.-Y ., M. Maire, S. Belongie, et al. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In
Computer Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September
6-12, 2014, Proceedings, Part V 13 , pages 740–755. Springer, 2014.
[25] Jia, M., L. Tang, B.-C. Chen, et al. Visual prompt tuning. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2022:
17th European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23–27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XXXIII ,
pages 709–727. Springer, 2022.
[26] Deng, J., W. Dong, R. Socher, et al. Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. In
2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 248–255. Ieee, 2009.
[27] Karras, T., T. Aila, S. Laine, et al. Progressive growing of gans for improved quality, stability,
and variation. In International Conference on Learning Representations . 2018.
[28] Zhou, B., A. Lapedriza, A. Khosla, et al. Places: A 10 million image database for scene
recognition. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 40(6):1452–1464,
2017.
[29] Heusel, M., H. Ramsauer, T. Unterthiner, et al. Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule
converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30,
2017.
[30] Hessel, J., A. Holtzman, M. Forbes, et al. Clipscore: A reference-free evaluation metric for
image captioning. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing , pages 7514–7528. 2021.
[31] Liu, L., Y . Ren, Z. Lin, et al. Pseudo numerical methods for diffusion models on manifolds. In
International Conference on Learning Representations . 2022.
12
A Demonstration of Architectures
CLIP Text Transformer
( )t⋅ CLIP
Input Text Sequence-Space -SpaceU-Net
Down-Sampling
BlocksCross-Attention Layers
U-Net
Up-Sampling
Blocks1 Inverse Matrix TransfertW−
tz1t−z
VA E
Encode r
VA E
Decoder0z
[ ]01, ,..., ,...,tT zz z z
Diffusion Process
Figure 11: The architecture of Stable Diffusion [ 4].
Image is compressed by V AE to get the latent z0, then
doing the diffusion process to acquire z1∼zT. The U-
Net learns to predict removing noise ϵθ(zt,c, t)when
input is zt. Notice that the text condition injects to the
U-Net by cross-attention layers, and the blue dotted
arrows present our reference image transfer.
CLIP Image Transformer
( )i⋅ CLIPCLIP Text Transformer
( )t⋅ CLIP
Input Text Sequence Input Patch Sequence-Space <cls> -Space <eos>-Space
iWtWFigure 12: The architecture of CLIP [ 15].
Class-token and end-token embeddings
fromI-space and T-space are projected
into the C-space, where the paired visual
and textual embeddings are close. The
Stable Diffusion [ 4] only utilizes the tex-
tual embedding from T-space.
Trainable 
ParametersInput Condition 
EmbeddingU-Net FeaturesqW
kW
vWCross-Attention Layer
ValueQuery
KeySoftmaxed
Weights
Figure 13: The cross-attention fine-tuning
demonstration. Wq, Wk, Wvare projections
for query, key, and value, respectively. In Sta-
ble Diffusion [ 4], the query is U-Net feature,
key and value are condition embedding (tex-
tual embedding or our converted embedding).
We only fine-tune Wk, Wvin updating, this
is the same as [13].
CLIP Image Transformer Layer 1
Patch Sequence-Space <cls>-Space
iW
<cls> Added PromptsInput Patch Sequence <cls> Added PromptsCLIP Image Transformer Layer 2…Patch Sequence <cls> Added PromptsCLIP Image Transformer Layer NFigure 14: Deep prompt tuning [ 25] for CLIP
image transformer. The gray part is the added
prompt in each layer. It will be optimized by
our fine-tuning loss.
13
B Fine-tuning Classes
Table 7: We randomly select 100 samples for each fine-tuning. This is the label list of the selected
classes. For ImageNet [ 26] and Places365 [ 28], we select 20 classes with 5 images in each class. For
CelebA-HQ [27], we select 10 people, below are their id-number in dataset.
Dataset fine-tuning Classes
ImageNet [26]laptop computer, water jug, milk can, wardrobe,
fox squirrel, shovel, joystick, wool, green mamba,
llama, pizza, chambered nautilus, trifle, balance
beam, paddle wheel
Places365 [28]greenhouse, wet bar, clean room, golf course, rock
arch, corridor, canyon, dining room, forest, shop-
ping mall, baseball field, campus, beach house, art
gallery, bus interior, gymnasium, glacier, nursing
home, storage room, florist shop
CelebA-HQ [27]7423, 7319, 6632, 3338, 9178, 6461, 1725, 774,
5866, 7556
C More Ablations
C.1 Impact of Parameter α
The impact of the editing parameter, α, is examined in Fig. 15, focusing on the "Obama" customized
model. A higher αvalue indicates a greater contribution of the editing text to the generation process.
Different editing instructions may require different values of α. For example, simpler edits like
"wearing glasses" may be expressed with lower α, even 0.0, as the added word-tokens in Eq. (8) also
input the cross-attention.
Input Images
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
“Wearing 
glasses”“Rainbow 
color hair”
Figure 15: Editing with different αvalue. Higher αexpresses more editing.
C.2 Impact of different xtarget
As introduced above, the reconstructed image xtarget can be xrefor another image. If we use an
image from the same class but not xrefasxtarget, we name this scheme A/B Training. Here are some
comparisons of using A/B training or not. As shown in the first two columns of Fig. 16, ImageNet
[26] is training data, if xtarget isxref(w/o A/B training), the generated images would remain the "gray
color" and "kid". If using A/B training, the images become "colorful castle" and emphasize the
"laptop". Notably, the portrait results appear similar, as the xtarget resembles xrefeven though it is
another image in CelebA-HQ[27].
14
Input Imagesw/
A/B Trainingw/o
A/B Training
Figure 16: Demonstration of A/B training method.
C.3 Editing Performance of Different Ablations
Input
Images
Editing
Text
with a 
mountain in 
the background.
with a city in 
the background.SD-IPCSD-IPC
-FT (C)SD-IPC
-FT (U)SD-IPC-FT SD-R
Figure 17: Results of text-edited image variation.
15
D More Results
D.1 More MSCOCO [24] Variation of SD-IPC
Input Images Input Images-- l 
-
Figure 18: MSCOCO [24] variation with SD-IPC. We report three results for each input image.
16
D.2 Editing with SD-IPC
Input Images SD-IPC (Ours)“Onthe
beac h”“Under the
starry sky”
Figure 19: Object editing with SD-IPC.
Input Images SD-IPC (Ours)“Wearing 
glasses”“Wearing 
a hat”
Figure 20: Portrait editing with SD-IPC.
17
Input Images SD-IPC (Ours)“Cyberpunk 
Style”“At midnight”
Figure 21: Scene editing with SD-IPC.
D.3 More SD-IPC-FT Variation
Input Images SD-RSD-IPC-FT 
(Ours)SD-IPC (Ours)
Figure 22: ImageNet [ 26] fine-tuned SD-IPC. There are some mistaken cases, such as the "teddybear"
example above, in SD-IPC. But fine-tuning would fix the incompatible.
18
Input Images SD-RSD-IPC-FT 
(Ours)SD-IPC (Ours)
Figure 23: CelebA-HQ [ 27] fine-tuned SD-IPC. Despite that SD-IPC can generate portraits, its results
coarsely match the semantics. SD-IPC-FT can create more similar portraits.
Input Images SD-RSD-IPC-FT 
(Ours)SD-IPC (Ours)
Figure 24: Places365 [ 28] fine-tuned SD-IPC. After fine-tuning, SD-IPC-FT can extract better scene
features, such as the "cave" and "pub" examples.
19
D.4 Editing Examples of Places365 Fine-tuned SD-IPC-FT
Input Images
“Cyberpunk style ” “At midnight ”SD-R
Without EditingSD-RSD-IPC-FT 
(Ours)SD-RSD-IPC-FT 
(Ours)SD-IPC-FT 
(Ours)
Figure 25: Places365 [28] fine-tuned SD-IPC-FT editing.
D.5 More Comparisons of DreamBooth [11] Benchmark
SD-IPC-CT 
(Ours)Custom
DiffusionTraining 
ImagesDreamBoothTextual
Inversion
SD-IPC-CT 
(Ours)Custom
DiffusionDreamBoothTextual
Inversion
A [V] sneaker with the Eiffel Tower in the background. A [V] sneaker on top of the sidewalk in a crowded street.
A [V] stuffed animal in the jungle.
 A purple [V] stuffed animal.
A [V] toy in the snow. A cube shaped [V] toy .
A [V] dog floating on top of wa te r. A [V] dog on top of gr een grass with sunflower s around it.
Figure 26: More results of DreamBooth [11] benchmark.
20
E Story Generation Example
•A little robot named Rusty went on an adventure to a big city.
•The robot found no other robot in the city but only people.
•T
he robot went to the village to find other robots.
•Then the robot went to the river.
•Finally, the robot found his friends.SD-I PC-FT  
(Ours)
SD w/ Text
Figure 27: A story generation example with our ImageNet [26] fine-tuned SD-IPC-FT.
F Custom Diffusion [13] with More Updates
Custom Diffusion Custom Diffusion Custom Diffusion
Without Editing
Without Editing“Rainbow color hair” “Young bog/girl”
“On the bed” “Pink furry”Training 
Images
Figure 28: Following the training details in Custom Diffusion [ 13], we fine-tuned Custom Diffusion
[13] with 250 iterations and shows it is effective for the generation and editing. We report 2 examples
for each editing.
21
